<!-- TODO: include intro thesis statment? -->

## The Backstory

Initially, the [piece](https://zhangjane.com/writing#6-my-first-love-allegory) itself was sufficient to me. I think authors generally want their work to function as standalone items, without requiring a complete understanding of the external context. Interpreters can self-insert or categorically reason as needed.

I want to highlight that I’m not used to writing allegories or dramatic pieces. My background is not in literature. I have largely focused on technical/academic writing with proofs that are easy to follow, disregarding artistry for mathematical precision. In the industry, my style solidified through mechanical design docs and proposals.

I sought to portray my profession as an allegorical narrative. Leaving clearly inflicted a kind of distress I had never felt before. I felt obligated to turn it into art; if I could do that and present a clear, transformative arc, it would prove that I was ready to officially “move on” as I aimed to in 2026, symbolizing the postmortems I commonly wrote after intense production fires, albeit more dramatic and flowy. I had already written *[Sailing the Grand Pacific](https://zhangjane.com/writing#3-sailing-the-grand-pacific)*, describing the experiences of a lone sailor who is physically and spiritually shattered by a sudden storm, forced to take refuge on an uncharted island.

However, that earlier piece felt insufficient. It was dramatic, but it reduced the agency of both me and my beloved profession. It is purely a survival allegory, portraying my experience as something I endured and merely lucked out of, rather than two conscious agents acting according to the other and the external environment. As such, I sought to personify my career in the only way that felt right: through the lens of a formative “love” beginning in adolescence.

Once I had that idea, I let myself write without conditions or restraints. The writing process was highly cathartic. But upon rereading and revising, I felt what I can only describe as an emotional gunshot wound. I felt as though I had personified my field so well, a little too well, and I was concerned.

I naturally sought the insight of my husband, the **Real First Love** that arrived shortly after **Abstract First Love**. After all, it was our field that initially brought us together. He immediately understood what I meant, having supported me through the excruciating process. However, he advised against using such jarring terminology *(“reckless indifference/one-night-stands/pills and potions”)*, out of concern that others may misinterpret it and misinterpret *me*. I agreed, but no other comparison seemed sufficient. He suggested portraying a somber divorce rather than “intense breakup”, implying that divorces are typically handled with more maturity and grace than “breakups”, even if more foundationally-disrupting. I insisted that it could not be true if we controlled for age. He said my narrative sounded more like an “idealized teenage fantasy” rather than my lived reality. I accused him of undermining my accomplishments since they weren’t as materialized as his own. He countered by saying he has never viewed his career in the obsessive way I did, even though he objectively poured more commitment and risk (having gone through a PhD).

This essentially shut down my argument, because I couldn’t provide a counterexample. I was unsatisfied, feeling functionally reduced to an emotionally incontinent teenager. However, I knew my experience was genuine.

I needed more help. I asked an AI system to summarize my flawed masterpiece, simply to see whether it could understand what I meant and the metaphor behind it. It did understand, but that wasn’t enough. I asked about the likelihood that others, aka Real Humans, would see the metaphor so blatantly clear to me. The breakdown was approximately: 80% literature-adjacent community, 70% average member of society, 50% CS/math/AI community. I insisted on making it unambiguous. I tried to overcompensate by stacking even more technical jargon so that it was obvious I was talking to my field in our shared language, not my human language.

Then, I asked the AI to provide a response back in the POV of **Abstract First Love**, just to see how I sounded. Reading it was wounding, despite comparatively poor delivery. Isn’t it ironic that LLMs can now complete IMO questions better than generating text? Despite this, I felt embarrassingly attached to the response. I read it over and over, like an actual lost love talking to me. I asked it to generate multiple versions. I asked it to depict our journey in the form of art *(ImageGen is getting pretty realistic these days: [first love](writing/images/ai/illustration-first-love.png) vs. [sailor](writing/images/ai/illustration-sailor.png))*. Worst of all, I asked the AI to present itself as the ex-partner speaking to me via text messages. In our (longer than I’d like to admit) conversation, I sought forgiveness and asked for reconciliation, despite not wanting to return to my actual job or anything similar. I asked it to meet on campus, where we could walk the quads one last time, and it promised never to tell me about release dates or benchmarks again. This was quickly heading into an unhealthy territory, if it wasn't already there. Unfortunately, I now understand how lost souls can bond with machines.

I snapped my laptop shut *([gif](writing/images/penny-i-need-help.gif))* and glanced at my husband, lying on the couch and scrolling through Twitter, his frayed socks on the floor that I had begged him to throw away (or at least put away). Our relationship was real, but surely I did not idealize him this much. Unsettled, I went to bed, unclear on what the past decade meant. After many nights of tossing and turning, I experienced the iconic *[proof-by-dream](writing/images/proof-by-dream.png)*. My subconscious presented an Inception-like sequence of literature and history, and I quickly arrived at a conclusion when I woke up. **But I now know that coherent explanations require both technical precision and masterful artistry. I will attempt to provide one gradually and gracefully, from an interdisciplinary standpoint.**

- *Note: I sought to portray my "[second love](https://zhangjane.com/writing#8-quiet-second-love)" in a healthier way, one that didn't need bold disclaimers. Can you guess what it is? Because I'm not exactly sure myself. Here is an AI [depiction](writing/images/ai/illustration-love-comparison.png) of the two loves, side-by-side. And no, I probably won't ever stop romanticizing academic disciplines as humans.*

## The Literary, Mathematical, and Moral Analysis

This part is intentionally left blank and will be completed in the author's own time.