Our honeymoon marked a two-week escape from the AI grind. I stared at the intricate art on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and got lost in the towering walls of St. Peter’s Basilica. I practically inhaled the gelato, and thought my shoes would give in between all the gallery hops in Florence.

I told myself that I was living out the modern-day version. The Renaissance marked a grand rebirth of the classics and gave us a new era of intellectual, artistic, and cultural change. Likewise, our society is undergoing a similar paradigm shift with the widespread integration of artificial intelligence, and I had the good fortune of working at *Gemini*. 

Before you tout models outperforming Gemini on some arbitrary metric, I am not claiming it to be the Sistine of foundation models (if one even exists), nor myself to be *half* as skilled as Michelangelo. However, we visited dozens of chapels and admired hundreds—maybe even thousands—of paintings across countless galleries. Each was utterly mesmerizing, and I’d be content with having worked on a single painting inside one of the hundreds of thousands of historic chapels scattered across the continent.

Maybe I was only trying to cope with the trip ending; when I went back to work, my inspiration quickly faded. I’m sure the artists had their rough days, but my reality felt completely different. It couldn’t have been due to a lack of scope or impact; recent advancements had already shaken the core of our society, and it was only the beginning. Being in the field also requires a mixture of both technical precision and creativity, comparable to that of the fine arts and sciences. 

I blame the modularization of our labor. As a software/machine learning engineer, when you have a great idea, you can just build and ship it, right? No, you need to run it by your manager first, who will clarify the scope, timeline, and priority after consulting with their own higher-ups. Great, now the work begins! But wait, you need to ask UX how to word the user-facing part, and wait for Product to flesh out the specifics of the end behavior. And your component interacts with another team’s component (a complete black box to you), so you tell them to do their part, even though it’s like a P2 on their end. Actually, it’s the TPM’s job to deliver the message through the meetings and the task ETAs. You just stick to your own code changes and get out of everybody’s way.

Weeks pass. You’ve managed to write your few dozen lines of code, completing your part. You wait for everyone else to be ready, then consult with both Legal and Marketing to ensure it’s launch-ready. Months later, you finally launch your little feature, exhausted and drained, and you’ve totally forgotten why you were so excited about it in the first place. You feel more like an assembly worker than a valued contributor to the paradigm shift of the New Age. Did those architects, painters, and sculptors have this many Jira meetings as well?

Perhaps this is why newer institutions such as OpenAI and Anthropic refer to their employees as the generic “Member of Technical Staff” rather than more granular labels (though the term actually originated way earlier, at Bell Labs). Claiming to prioritize open-collaboration and collective expertise, they tend to be relatively flat in hierarchy, and staff members hold less-rigid roles. Each employee may wear multiple hats. Additionally, in the hiring process, newer startups tend to focus on general qualities, such as adaptability and problem-solving skills, rather than domain expertise.

Compartmentalization is efficient, especially for scaling inside larger corporations. The hiring pipeline becomes more streamlined, and each employee can focus on what they are supposedly best at. However, it erodes the artistry feeling we naturally crave.

While the AI race continues, the reliability and precedence of established organizations battle with the passion and spirit of newer startups. We shall observe the intense tug-of-war inside an exciting and rapidly evolving socioeconomic landscape. Or we can choose to simply lose ourselves in the vast literature of the Renaissance—several lifetimes before the word “robot” had ever appeared—and just forget it all. To me, both are equally valid.
