I’m no stranger to jealousy-by-comparison, and the debilitating emotions that come with it. Just ask my petty teenage self, upon learning that a neighbor had gotten into a school with an acceptance rate 1% lower than mine. Or my studious college self, when my friend received an A on our exam despite not studying at all. Or even my ambitious early-career self, faced with the barrage of promo updates on LinkedIn from random acquaintances I hadn’t spoken to in years.

However, I woke up today with the warm glow of sunlight on my face and realized my mind was oddly empty, akin to an eerie sense of peace after endless years of war. It had actually been this way for a while, though I just registered it. It’s like when you have a cold, and you can’t breathe through your nose. You wallow in the misery, but it eventually clears, and you go about your life as usual. Then, after some time, you realize, *hey, my nose is clear now! That feeling sucked, and I don’t want to take this for granted again!*

Similar to the poor fellow with the cold, I’m not claiming to have become immune to envy (or any negative emotion, for that matter). I’m sure I’ll come across it again in the future, as I face inevitable challenges ahead. It’s quite a common fallacy that people believe their current state (whether good or bad) is final. When you’re warm, you think you’ll never be cold again, and vice versa. All I can say is that I am *content* right now. With everything that has happened and all the actions I have taken in response, I've gradually come to the conclusion that I have made the right decisions up to this point. I firmly believe that my life is *currently* the best it can be, leaving no more room for the negativity that once consumed me.

So now, I enjoy my time on the beach, sipping mimosas and watching whales from afar. Occasionally, though, I still glance at the twists and turns behind me, parting with a sense of bewilderment. I wonder how I could have possibly escaped the torrent of fires and floods in a run-down SUV with half a tank of gas. With that, I look towards every tinge of bitterness, resentment, and despondency I've felt in the process. I realize now that, however burdensome at the time, they have served and protected me well. Acting as undercover guardian angels, they've guided me through the disasters, propelled me to take concrete steps forward, and enabled me to move from local to global optima—an otherwise mathematically impossible phenomenon.