I’m no stranger to jealousy. Just ask my teenage self, when confronted with the news that a neighbor got accepted into a school with a 1% acceptance rate lower than mine. Or my college self, when my friend received an A on our exam despite not studying at all. Or even my early career self, faced with the barrage of promo updates on LinkedIn from random acquaintances I haven’t spoken to in years.

However, I woke up today with the warm glow of sunlight on my face and realized my mind was oddly empty, like a strange sensation of peace after years of endless war. It has actually been this way for a while, though I just registered it. It’s like when you have a cold, and you can’t breathe through your nose. You wallow in the misery, but it eventually clears, and you go about your life as usual. Then, after some time, you realize, *hey, my nose is clear now! That feeling sucked, and I don’t want to take this for granted again!*

I’m not saying I am now immune to the feeling of jealousy (or any negative emotion). I’m sure I’ll come across it again in the future, as I face inescapable challenges ahead. It’s quite a common fallacy that people believe their current state (whether good or bad) is final. When you’re warm, you think you’ll never be cold again, and vice versa. But now, I am *content*. With everything that has happened and all the steps I have taken in response, I genuinely believe I have made the right decisions up to this point and that my life is presently the best it can be.

As a result, the feeling of spite doesn’t *currently* impact me. If I see someone doing well, I am happy rather than resentful. If I see someone doing *objectively better* than me in some aspect, I view it as aspiring rather than irritating—something to strive towards. Now this sounds like a broken record uttered by my haughty 18-year-old self, but this time, I promise I’m not virtue signaling. My inductive reasoning tells me that because I am content, significant negative emotions (outside of mild annoyances on a day-to-day basis) no longer consume me.

I’ve always prided myself on using factual logic rather than fleeting emotions to guide my decision-making. Nonetheless, I want to make it clear that **emotions are useful** (yes, I’m [looking](https://gifs.alphacoders.com/gifs/view/36968) at all you **stoics**). Approximately 6 million years of human evolution and the insane development of our formidable brains, and you want to claim that emotions are just some dispensable byproduct? What a strange cope.

On the other hand, I must concede that the methods and mechanisms individuals typically use to manage their emotions are completely unproductive and even harmful. There are so many examples out there, but I broadly place them into three categories: avoidance, brute-force, and fixation. Avoidance involves ignoring your problems and the reality around you—the “going off the grid” soldier who deletes all social media and moves to Bolivia. Brute-force deals with masking your problems with various distractions, be it work (grinding for the next promotion), fitness (training for your third marathon this year), or traveling (living out your escapist fantasies)—the self-help books and the cold plunges at 5 AM. Lastly, fixation refers to excessively complaining about your problems and overanalyzing your emotions rather than taking action—society’s recent obsession with talk therapy.

While any of those three mechanisms may feel good in the moment and provide temporary relief, they don’t do anything to fix the root problem that triggered the negative emotion(s) in the first place. I believe the evolutionary purpose of emotions is to enable humans to understand and utilize them to implement concrete actions to improve their lives. Think of your life as a naturally balanced state of equilibrium inside a vacuum. Various external events may throw the equilibrium off, and your emotions provide the *internal push* to rebalance it. After all, existing outside of equilibrium is far more energy-consuming (and not to mention, plainly uncomfortable).

That said, I argue that *you can only experience negative emotions if you’re not content with your life*. So the next time you find yourself jealous/sad/angry/whatever, spend some time reflecting on what’s currently wrong with your life, and what steps you can take to make it better. Rechanneling your focus from external stimuli (i.e., the offending person/situation) to yourself will save you a lot of valuable energy and lead to tangible wins rather than the standard ball-and-chain resentment. Have the courage to *embrace* your emotions rather than *fear* them. After all, human feelings have evolved over millions of years to serve and protect you, not hold you back. They guide us out of difficult situations, enabling us to move from local to global optima—an otherwise mathematically impossible phenomenon.
