Hi, I'm Jane. I worked at [Google](https://about.google/) and [DeepMind](https://deepmind.google/about/) as a software engineer / machine learning engineer for 4 years, on [Google Assistant](https://assistant.google.com/) and [Gemini](https://gemini.google.com/). Before that, I went to [Cornell](https://www.cornell.edu/about/) for my degree in [computer science](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/), where I did two summer internships (in Ads and Cloud). This past summer, I decided to leave my job, and will write more about my experience here.

*Disclaimer:* I'm aware there are numerous *"Why I left Google"* perspectives out there already. I'm not aiming for mine to be exceptionally unique among the rest; this is just to collect my personal thoughts. It's divided into **4 sections** - **[1]** my **personal background**, **[2]** **general commentary** on pros/cons, **[3]** **why I left**, and **[4]** **what's next**. Feel free to skip around as there is *a lot* of content. Also, thanks to Deedy's [post](https://debarghyadas.com/writes/why-i-left-google/) for inspiration on the structure.


## [1] My time at Google

Google has been an integral component of my college experience and young adult life. It was immensely difficult saying goodbye to something I viewed as a core part of both my professional and personal identity. After all, it's been my dream company ever since I started studying computer science.

### Background and timeline
- **The interview (2018):** A recruiter reached out to me, inviting me to an interview! I was totally caught off guard. It was quite the busy semester as a college sophomore, consisting of challenging classes, multiple extracurriculars, and preliminary exams creeping up. Fortunately, I had practiced some Leetcode problems throughout the summer beforehand. My interview was online, on a Google doc. I got two questions; the first was an easy string manipulation one that I quickly solved. The second was trying to simulate some scenario that could be described by a series of *finite states*, and I had no idea how to translate it into code. I was super defeated, but 10 minutes before the end, I suddenly remembered the term *DFA - deterministic finite automaton*, which I had learned in my discrete math class the semester prior. I scrambled to convert the DFA into code during the last few minutes, writing barely legible pseudocode and blurting out my seemingly incomprehensible thought process. After the time was up, I thought I had definitely failed. A week later, my recruiter randomly calls me out of the blue. I missed the call, and called back as soon as I saw it, but he had gone home for the day already. As expected, I couldn't focus on anything else, but we eventually found some time to chat the next day. I then take the call inside the Hotel School (where I was taking a class), and he tells me I got the offer. Wow, I can't believe it; I got into my dream company!!! The following months after, I went through team matching and studied C++ and various machine learning concepts to prepare for my internship.
- **First internship, Cloud (2019):** I was so excited to live in SF for the first time! I got a high-rise apartment with a few other interns, and we would take the MUNI to the SF office together. Orientation was in the MTV headquarters, and everything was so cool! Free swag, the slides and beanbags, colorful bikes, and seemingly endless array of cafés sprawled across campus. We were living the dream. When the time came to actually integrate with my team and submit code, I was quite intimidated. I couldn't even get anything to compile at first. Thankfully my host was extremely patient and I realized it was just some syntax errors and latency of the internal code editor. With the support from my host and team, I was able to finish my project ahead of time, complete some extra tasks, and learn a lot about the team and company dynamics. Outside of work, there were so many fun intern events and endless things to do in the city.
- **Second internship, Ads (2020):** At this point, COVID had taken over, so my internship was made remote (unfortunate but better than getting cancelled entirely). I got a laptop and monitor shipped to Ithaca, and set it up inside my student apartment. Everything seemed a lot more serious than the summer before, without the in-person presence and all the extravagant intern events. I programmed a basic application inside the team codebase - both the front and backend, and got a feel for what full stack SWE was actually like (compared to the summer before, when I had worked on a relatively self-contained intern project). I also began to conceptualize what being a full time SWE entailed - promotions, politics, fighting over headcount/scope, etc. It wasn't just carelessly hacking all day. Anyway, I finished my project and was able to get a bunch of lines of code in, and everything was set for me to join full-time.
- **New grad SWE, Ads (2021):** COVID was still a thing so I started remote again, but this time in the Bay Area. I joined my previous intern team, and everything was relatively stable. I was already familiar with the tech stack and was able to jump into contributing. This went on for around a year, until ~May 2022, when Google announced RTO. However, most of my team remained remote. I liked my team but wanted to try something else - something with a more in-person, collaborative feel, and closer to my interest in machine learning and natural language processing, as compared to general SWE. Thus, I began the transition into my next team, Assistant NLP.
- **Assistant NLP (2022):** This is when things started *happening*! My new team had a heavy in-person presence, and I met so many new people. Everyone seemed so brilliant and passionate about what they were doing. There weren't a lot of L3s though (as the team leaned more towards experienced/specialized folks), so I felt a bit out of place as an early-career SWE. Nevertheless, I slowly began integrating myself in more and more projects, and eventually landed my first promotion. At the same time, ChatGPT had come out, and LLMs were now a thing. Google Assistant wasn't so hot anymore, and it didn't feel safe in the team anymore. We were quickly getting replaced by more advanced technologies, and many of us were scrambling towards an out...
- **Bard/Gemini (2023):** Thankfully, around Thanksgiving of 2023, my team was re-orged into Bard (now known as Gemini, which later became incorporated into Google DeepMind, which I reference here as GDM). I had a new team. Everyone was new, actually, and it was the first time Google was building something like this. It was the ultimate race to catch up, so we dove in head first. Daily standups, lightning speed, limited corporate BS - it was such an exciting time! It was easy to get areas of ownership and carve out exciting/impactful projects because everything was so new. The team expanded quickly, and we enjoyed countless events, celebrations, and gifts for working so hard on this critical launch. I was so honored to be contributing to such an important mission with numerous devoted engineers and researchers.

## [2] General commentary on Google (and GDM)

Here I'll outline some of the pros and cons of working at Google and GDM. I think these are all fairly common praises and critiques which have been widely shared across the Internet already. Again, this is just my personal take on the ones that stood out to me the most. Also, I think the benefits are quite self-explanatory, so I've put more focus on the downsides.

### The good
- **The people:** As the saying goes, the people make the place. I've met some of the most intelligent, hardworking, and passionate individuals in the field thanks to my time at Google + GDM. It's amazing how some of the brightest minds from all over the world have come to a single place, unified on a single mission - to advance the development of technology and society. Saying goodbye to so many wonderful mentors, colleagues, and friends was one of the most difficult things I had ever done.
- **The impact:** Google serves billions of users daily across all its products and services. It's arguably one of the most impactful companies in the world. As a single engineer, a single line of code you write (*or fail to write*) can affect millions of individuals within the span of seconds. Even a simple experiment on something trivial can reach so many users globally. Though you may see yourself as insignificant, surrounded by a bunch of peers working on similar tasks, the level of impact you make at Google is really something special.
- **The perks:** This goes without saying, but the stocked microkitchens, commuter shuttles, and diverse cafés have given Google the "Best Company to Work For" title many times across various sources over the years. Also you know, the general stability of having a corporate job  - the income, 401k, health benefits, etc. Need I say more?


### The bad
- **Stagnation:** After 20 years since its founding in the *garage*, Google has grown into a corporate giant of nearly 200k employees. It naturally follows that the innovation and passion present in its early days would erode over time. There are now so many legacy teams stuck in maintenance mode, without room for growth or new projects. This was somewhat more ideal 5 years ago in the prime tech economy, where employees could work for 2 hours a day and collect a cushy paycheck - *rest and vest*, as they call it. Now, those same teams are facing layoff after layoff, with the constant looming threat of becoming replaced or rendered obsolete. Advancement beyond L4/L5 has become exceedingly rare, and if one is expected to reach the peak of their career 2 years after graduating from college, what's the point of even trying? Things were a bit better after moving to GDM, but the same principles still apply.
- **The bubble:** Yet another inevitable consequence of its size, Google feels like a separate bubble from the rest of the industry. The tech stack is incredibly siloed. Engineers spend the time and effort onboarding to Google's internal processes and tools that aren't super transferrable in the broader tech market. Even at GDM, I always felt like we had our own way of doing things, and felt somewhat out of loop with the broader AI community (*though maybe research is different*). Inside my position, I never felt like I truly understood *AI*; I was just overfitting myself to Google's arbitrary protocol of optimizing various metrics related to Assistant/Bard/Gemini. Keeping up to date with the field required lots of "homework" outside of my actual job, which was especially hard to carve time for during my time on Gemini.
- **The bureaucracy:** I think I've had up to 8 managers at once on my reporting chain during my time at Google. With so many different levels, communication becomes considerably difficult. There are so many conflicting interests on priorities, and projects would constantly be moved around/deprioritized/tossed entirely, wasting thousands of precious eng-hours. ICs become completely misaligned with leadership, and it takes forever to make a simple decision since there are so many different people/teams to get approval from. In addition, many different teams end up working on something similar due to miscommunication, and politics take over when determining who takes the prize. Fighting for scope and "playing the game" become more important than doing the actual work. Basically the opposite of efficiency and just "getting stuff done" - what you'd expect at a startup.
- **Comp:** Honestly, I've never been the one to fixate on TC. My goal was always simply to make enough to live a comfortable life, while working on something I found interesting. However, it's quite the common complaint that Google's comp packages are severely lacking among its competitors, both in the general SWE and AI market. I think this was fine a few years ago, when many saw the big G as just some comfy rest 'n vest job with cushy perks and benefits, and Google clearly got away with it due to its legacy and name brand. But now, in this climate? Especially in AI, with all the crazy packages to poach top talent, I don't think Google can afford to be slacking anymore. Top performers have been leaving at an accelerating rate. If Google wants to both retain and attract new, fresh talent in order to remain competitive, I think it really needs to do better.
- **The AI race:** This is more of a broader industry complaint, but applies to Gemini/GDM so I've included it. While leadership would always preach "work life balance" to us, the looming deadlines and constant competitor launches made it so that we could never truly relax. It felt like we had to be "on" all the time - in our commute home, weekend outings, dinner with family, etc. I was always thinking about work, unable to shut my brain off, and the barrage of work-related pings persisted through the night. No one explicitly demanded a 996, but it was the natural state we found ourselves in the midst of all the pressure. Don't get me wrong; I love sprinting, and have relied on many short bursts of high-intensity work to get things done in my life. But *this* sprint never ended. The launch would get delayed by something out of our control, or we'd launch just to face an unexpected fire, or another project becomes P0000+ and we need to completely shift our focus. Sprinting is all good and well, but it's called a *sprint*, meaning it's supposed to come to an end eventually, right?

## [3] Why I left

TLDR; it was a combination of general burnout coupled with some major life changes, realizations, and shifting priorities. My team at GDM has always been supportive, but I felt like I couldn't give them my best anymore. Coasting didn't feel morally right, and I didn't have the energy to switch teams or companies. I just wanted to take some time off entirely from the AI/tech world and live on my own terms for a bit.

### Life changes
- **Marriage:** My husband and I got married in the summer of 2024. Previously, I didn't think marriage would change much about our lives, as we had been together since freshman year of college. In fact, I had spent my entire time on Bard/Gemini being engaged and trying to plan our wedding, taking pride in my busyness, productivity, and self-perceived ability to *have it all*. If I could get all this done DURING the pre-wedding festivities, imagine how productive I'll be AFTER? But then the day passed, and our lives/my mindset somewhat shifted. I've come to the realization that the optimization function for a legally joined couple is quite different from the optimization function for a single individual; I'll go more into this later.
- **Health:** Around that time, I also had a thought: *maybe I should get a health checkup for once, since I'm in my mid-twenties now*. So I went to the doctor and did a lab panel, and EVERYTHING was red. Okay, a bit of an exaggeration, but I was shocked. My tests showed I had high cholesterol levels, glucose levels corresponding to prediabetes, and a severe vitamin D deficiency. My naive self previously thought that since I was relatively thin and had no glaring issues, I didn't need to take anything too seriously. I had become complacent with a sedentary lifestyle (only getting activity in on the weekends) and poor diet (I consumed TONS of sugar, eating pastries for breakfast and relying on many snacks at work to provide energy through *the grind*). I had always taken my health for granted before, and this was a huge reality check.

### Mental bandwidth
With so many things going on at once and my team relentlessly growing in size and complexity, it just felt so strenuous to keep up with everything. I naturally put my job first, and it ended up consuming me mentally. I woke up, thought about all my work obligations, responded to pings, rushed between meetings, etc. I'd be pushing the grocery cart at the supermarket with all the upcoming deadlines present in the back of my head. I'd lay in bed, and different variations of our model prompt would appear in my head just as I was about to nod off, jerking me awake. It was like the grind took over my brain, and I could never shut it off.

While I had been busy through various points in my life before, such as high school or college, this time was *different*, which I attribute to 3 reasons. First, being in school meant exposure to a broader variety of subjects, such as the humanities or arts instead of just technical ones. Having this balance meant my brain wasn't confined to a single realm, and could rest in between. Second, I had limited responsibilities other than academic achievement. In high school my parents cooked all the meals and kept the house clean, and in college our dorms and dining halls provided everything we needed to keep our undivided focus on school. As an adult, I became responsible for the general *life upkeep* I had previously taken for granted. Lastly, as mentioned before, health is something I have to actively work for now. And the mere fact that I am older now makes it harder to do the deep technical work as quickly/efficiently as it would have been in my teens. I felt that I had to be operating under optimal circumstances (8 hours of sleep, peak energy levels, etc.) to perform technically complex tasks.

I also noticed my literary capabilities declining. The only time I ever read or wrote anything was coding or prompting. My vocabulary was diminishing, as I struggled to recall words that I had commonly used before. My spoken language felt choppy and unsophisticated. I noticed this and tried to get into reading again, but it had become so arduous for my brain to process actual literary text that wasn't code or prompt. I felt as if I had actually become a robot/computer (*as opposed to just training them*), living and breathing in binary.

### Macroeconomics theory
Back in school, I took a basic economics class and learned about the concept of absolute advantage vs. comparative advantage. Simply put, absolute advantage measures a nation's efficiency in producing a good relative to its own production of another good, and comparative advantage measures the nation's production of the two goods relative to the same production ratios of *another* nation. To determine if trade is economically advantageous between the two, we look at the comparative rather than the absolute advantage.

To me, this concept was quite unintuitive, but it was backed by simple mathematics. And if it's verified for international policy, could a parallel be drawn inside marriages? Since childhood, my life was focused on the optimization of *myself* as a single unit. I was academically gifted, especially among math and science. Thus, I naturally gravitated towards a technical career and directed most of my focus towards my academic and professional accomplishments. However, after marriage I no longer viewed my life as an optimization objective for a single individual but rather a holistic unit of two. My husband, who is an AI researcher, also had a demanding job and was arguably more technically proficient and a lot better at handling intense workloads. At the same time, though I prided myself with being career-driven, I was clearly better (and naturally took on most of the load) at preparing meals, keeping our space clean, and managing general household responsibilities.

As a result, I thought we could experiment with the principle of *specialization* to maximize efficiency in our lives - at least for a while. My husband took on the financial responsibility and I handled everything else - cooking healthy meals, maintaining our home, managing our shared schedule, etc. So far, I'd say this experiment has gone quite well and has produced measurably better outcomes for the both of us. In terms of quantifiables, we have consumed more nutritious and homemade meals, have more time to exercise and spend time with each other, and our stress levels have gone down considerably. Additionally, from not having to worry about anything at home and therefore being able to direct all that extra focus into work, my husband has been able to progress his career at an accelerated rate, which has completely made up for and even surpassed my loss of income.

So is this it? Is this how couples should operate, with the man hard at work and the woman confined to the home? Not necessarily (*so don't come at me for putting out anti-feminist propaganda*). Obviously every couple is different, each individual has varying goals/interests, and there's more to life than optimizing efficiency. I will say though, it's been really nice with my husband being able to advance his career faster, and me being able to focus on my health currently (which is especially critical if I want kids in the future, *a harsh reality of being a woman*).

### Life outside tech
Another motivation I had was to expand my horizons outside of tech/AI, after being siloed in the industry for so long. Especially with a husband working at the forefront of AI, I sought to diversify myself and our shared life. Even if I ended up going back eventually, I knew it was important to take a step back in order to achieve a more well-rounded, balanced perspective. I decided to use this time to enjoy all the things I wanted to do but never had the time and energy before, as described in the next section.


## [4] What's next?
Generally, I've been focusing on health (*managing nutrition and exercise*), taking care of household responsibilities, and simply trying to live life without too much structure. I'm currently not doing any *paid* work outside of volunteering. It's been quite the novel experience, coming from a person who previously felt the compulsive need to have everything planned out. In a society where we are so tied to *occupation*, I don't have clear answers on a next *career move* at the moment. Because of this, I was hesitant to add this section, but I'll cover what I've currently been doing and my vision for the future.


### What I've been doing
- **Prioritizing my health:** This is self-explanatory, so I'll keep it short. Health is my utmost priority, and is typically broken down into 3 categories: exercise, diet, and sleep. I've been maintaining a somewhat consistent [schedule](/fitness.html) of hikes/runs/gym time on a weekly basis, have done my fair share of research and experimentation on nutrition optimization (*in addition to the manual labor of meal prep - see [cookbook](/cookbook.html)*), and am broadly trying to get enough rest. I'm planning to make a separate post about all of this as well, so stay tuned.
- **Exploring other interests:** When I first left my job, all I wanted to do was work with my hands, as opposed to intensively using my brain. I wanted to try something new and different, and get my mind off of AI/tech. I began taking a few ceramics classes at a local studio and started volunteering at our local nonprofit community garden and cat shelter. I've also started collecting/growing my own [plants](/plants.html), and adopted two [kittens](/kitties.html) after fostering an entire litter. It's been so nice getting to explore different domains, and I find life a lot more enriching now.
- **The art of stochasticity:** I also made it a goal to simply live, *at least for a period of time*, without artificial deadlines and too much structure. Instead of enforcing a rigid schedule/timeline, I try to listen to myself and just do what *feels* right, day by day. I've always been an extremely *Type A* person, and this was very unsettling at first, but after some time I've begun to really appreciate this way of living! This isn't to say that I won't default back to a more organized/demanding lifestyle in the future; I'm just trying to enjoy the present *right now*.

### My future goals
- **Achieving green metrics:** Referencing the Google standard, if I make my health a top *OKR*, there must be *deliverables*. While fitness goals are subjective, I want to achieve an all green health panel, meaning no abnormal results in *any* category (*thankfully prediabetes and high cholesterol are fully reversible*), before trying to start anything new with my life. As we were told on Gemini, *the dashboard needs to be all green before we launch!*
- **Solidifying habits:** It takes an average of 66 days to form a habit, according to *Atomic Habits*. I'm generally not a fan of self-help books, but this is a commonly cited statistic, and it makes sense. In addition to simply *obtaining* a healthy panel, I'd like for my new fitness and dietary habits to be *fully grounded* before starting anything new. For example, I intend to make my active lifestyle so integrated with routine, that I view it as a *non-negotiable* I need to incorporate into whatever I do next. I'm proud of the progress I've made so far, and the last thing I would want is for all of it to go down the drain as soon as I move onto the *next big thing*. Additionally, I'm still actively experimenting with new methods and mechanisms, so it might take some more time to find and establish a solid routine that works best for me.
- **Finding something sustainable:** Last but not least, when I achieve all the above, I'd like to settle into the next chapter of my life while making sure I don't lose all my progress. I'm uncertain what the specifics will be, but it needs to be compatiable with the new standards I've set for myself. I see two obvious paths ahead: [1] *go back to tech/AI*, or [2] *remain in the domestic sphere and start having/raising kids*. Of course, there are also *career pivots, lateral moves, side hustles, etc.* that I can explore. And right now, *I'm not exactly sure*. I think I'd still want to exist in the professional world in some capacity, as it would add another dimension to my life. I don't see kids as an excuse to get out of it; if anything, it's more of a reason to stay professionally involved so I’m not siloed or deeply confined to a single objective like I was at my previous job. At the same time, I need to find something sustainable, health/interests/time wise. Also, I currently want a break from anything super technical, but at the same time still want to make use of my degree I've worked so hard for. Anyway, aside from the rambling, I'm not putting too much pressure on myself right now to figure this all out. Rushed plans are far from the best ones.

In conclusion, the future is uncertain, but that’s what makes it exciting - especially when I had my life seemingly all planned out before. I'm looking forward to whatever comes next, and am grateful for everything I got to experience throughout my time at Google, GDM, and the broader tech/AI industry. As they say, *when nothing is sure, everything is possible*.

## *Endnotes*

*Thank you Google and DeepMind for a memorable experience. Thank you to my colleagues, mentors, and friends for all the memories, laughs, and support. Here is a [photo](writing/images/jane-google.jpg) of me late 2018, on my first visit to the Google HQ. Lastly, thank you for reading. If you have any questions or comments, please don't hesitate to [contact](/contact) me.*
