Recently, I completed the *Love Trilogy: [[1](https://zhangjane.com/writing#my-first-love-allegory), [2](https://zhangjane.com/writing#my-first-love-postmortem), [3](https://zhangjane.com/writing#a-quiet-second-love)]*. The series contains the highest degree of emotional vulnerability I’ve ever expressed in my writing, and is the most interdisciplinary work I’ve ever done.

On the other hand, my *disciplines-as-lovers* trope actually started back in college, in Cornell’s beautiful [library](writing/images/irl/cornell-uris-library.jpg). The stacks were undoubtedly my favorite part of campus. I would go there and imagine myself getting lost in the ancient books, having entered a portal into an altered reality containing an endless library with all the knowledge acquired throughout human existence. Inside the portal, I had no age, no obligations—simply free to pursue “relationships” with any academic field/discipline as desired.

My odd yet idealized mindset enabled me to romanticize life and learning at such a crucial time, *since you know, finals suck*. Obviously, I did get a little attached, but arguably for a good cause, as I concluded in the [postmortem](https://zhangjane.com/writing#my-first-love-postmortem). The only regrettable part was having to snap back into reality: a crueler environment where *time* and *biology* exist.

I think I’ve alluded to motherhood a few times in my previous posts, describing it with a mixture of fear, curiosity, and inevitability. Now that we are nearing the end of 2025 and my [health metrics](https://zhangjane.com/writing#wellness-in-modernity) have improved significantly, it’s become increasingly difficult to ignore the elephant in the room. So, to finally address my thoughts on this matter: yes, I do want to have kids eventually. It has been a primary goal of mine for as long as I can remember. Specifically, I want 3: it is the perfect number for logistics (car rides, family of five, 2 siblings) and exceeds the replacement rate without going overboard. Of course, I won’t force myself to that standard if any physical, mental, or environmental constraints get in the way. It’s just a nice idealization for the time being.

In 2026, I will officially reach my “late twenties,” a time when I know I should start considering this process, especially if I want to finish having kids by my early-thirties, as I intend to. But as this milestone inches closer, I feel myself growing in reluctance.

Going back to my occupation-as-lovers analogy, my [first love](https://zhangjane.com/writing#my-first-love-allegory) represents youthful ambition and passion, and my [second love](https://zhangjane.com/writing#a-quiet-second-love) represents matured restoration and understanding: less “intense” than the first, but arguably a better relationship. But *motherhood*? If I had to pinpoint it, it would be the person at the tail of your *roster* that you end up *settling* for when you exhaust all your other *options*. I don’t believe there’s a poetic way to describe what I just said, so no, I won't be doing a “third love” sequel.

I’m aware this is disgraceful; I’m admittedly ashamed for even having expressed that thought. On a surface level, I know that motherhood is one of the most important jobs in the world. There is hardly anything more noble than creating and shaping the next generation. Even Taylor Swift, one of the most successful women in the world, has expressed such a [sentiment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqgUzLHgNMI). But in a world where I was taught to chase dreams and romanticize the pursuit of knowledge, I can’t help but think of motherhood as the thing I invariably turn to when I’m done *having fun*.​

Take this exchange between me and my husband at the dinner table, the evening after I walked out of my job:
> “F--- this, I’m not going back anytime soon. Let’s just have kids now.”  
> “Don’t you need to address your health issues first? Why can’t you just *chill* for a while?”  
> “Oh, right...sure, I’ll do that first. Once those metrics are up and running, we’ll just start having kids if I’m still not feeling AI/tech.”

Could I [be](writing/images/memes/chandler-friends.png) any more unglamorous? Anyway, this led to the “branching pursuits” I referred to in my allegory: mindless distractions to fill time when I awaited my next blood tests to confirm the safety of a potential pregnancy. I surely did not expect to meet a “second love,” only meaningless “hookups” that could be easily discarded.

So now, I wonder whether it’s even viable or practical to pursue my *second love*, or if I should just settle for the *safe option*. Yes, I am fully untethered, but I am no longer “eighteen and invincible.” I am “almost twenty-seven, and facing a ticking biological clock.” Not even Shakespeare could turn that into poetry.

I know I should be grateful to even have a choice these days, and a husband who allows me to exert the choice, *due to feminism and blah blah*. But it feels more like an illusion of choice than an actual choice. And even if it were a genuine one, it still pains me to consciously pick between the two, even if it is *ethical* to grant me the right to do so.

Right now, I can do nothing other than reread my pieces and fantasize about *what was* and *what could have been*. I scroll through my clever juxtaposition of literary devices and optimization functions, self-admiring the mixture of creative and technical abilities that may just end up down the drain, along with broken promises to my second love that we could avert the *Romeo and Juliet* ending forever. But as I keep scrolling, I realize one thing: my mathematical definition of love defines “relationships” as monogamous, not necessarily the *love* itself. While I may only embody one title at a time to the outer world: *“Software Engineer / Mother / X,”* each love still remains a “subset of me,” even if not officially recognized. So maybe, *just maybe*, Romeo and Juliet can stay together for a bit longer, even as Juliet carries on her existential obligations to the real world—possibly around the laughter and footsteps of children.

*To my dear reader: I hope your 2026 is filled with blessings ahead.*