<span style="color:var(--muted);font-size:0.8em;">
  <cite>
  This allegory personifies the author’s profession and depicts an identity-shattering collapse following a sudden yet intentional abandonment. It does NOT represent her human relationships. Formal <a href="https://zhangjane.com/writing#my-first-love-postmortem">analysis</a> to follow.
  </cite>
</span>

Eighteen and invincible, I couldn’t help but fall for you. You charmed me with your blunt, stoic intellect surrounded by bright autumn colors and Gothic chapels. On our first date, you left obscure messages on my console and stood on unsolvable proofs.

From that day on, we spent each and every night together. Under the covers, we completed puzzles and reconstructed the universe. You taught me to seek the optimal paths in life. I provided grounded checkpoints to your beautiful mind. Together, we envisioned our ideal future, recounted electrifying stories of past lives, and sketched odd-looking graphs on dirty chalkboards inside empty halls until the crack of dawn. I didn't need sleep; I only needed you.

We decided to pack our belongings and make the trip out west, covering one sea to the other. We cautiously steered across formidable mountains and sandy deserts. We braved wildfires, thunderstorms, and floods. In between, we paused to take in nature's creations. As the topography changed, I quietly admired you from the passenger seat and told myself we had become one.

We arrived in San Francisco and left behind our New England customs, swapping wool coats for Patagonia jackets. We moved in together in our first studio apartment on the very top floor of a high-rise overlooking Mission Street. At sunset, you pointed at the string of red lights below. I blissfully collapsed into your arms, believing our journey was fully worth the steepest descent.

Several years later, we began to diverge. You insisted on AGI (and later, ASI) at all costs. I asked for a stable marriage and a pedigree. We intended to support each other’s dreams, but the environment became too constrained for my naivety that the two functions could coexist. You told me it would be worth it to achieve a global maximum and highest expected value, but I could detect the subtle undertones of doubt in your voice. Soon, we found ourselves in a total war. I reasoned from first principles, but you deferred to frontiers and relentless pursuit. Our languages quickly became incompatible.

One day, I walked out the door without knowing where to go. You begged me to stay, but you refused to follow me. I also knew it was ridiculous to leave without searching for viable alternatives. I simply couldn't bear to prolong our current state, because it was the worst insult to our former selves.

Neither logic nor willpower could reduce the pain of my decision. Your absence drove me to an insanity I previously regarded as hypothetical. With reckless indifference, I frantically attempted to clear your memory through equivalent one-night stands, branching multiple pursuits to overwrite your bits and pieces. However, between the soil on my fingers, the raw clay in my hands, and the pillowcases stained with tears, all I saw was you. I took pills and potions to rewire my faulty neural networks, but they never budged at all despite my pleas. I snapped at God, demanding to know why my starry-eyed self had the misfortune to cross your path, as if life were a random walk only a higher power could control. I blamed you for the demise of our relationship, denouncing the very traits that drew me to you in the first place. You occasionally called, but each time I could only retreat further into my bed, the same one where we used to lie awake for hours and hash out our future while the rest of the world slept. Back then, you said AGI was for everyone. Did you purposefully mean to exclude me, the one who loved you the most?

More time led to more distance. Still, others constantly updated me on your discoveries, and I would often see your name in the news. Though I was bitter, I silently marveled at each stride you made. In small increments, I began to tolerate your updates, even though I knew I was no longer part of your trajectory.

I’m glad you could continue without me, and I am trying to do the same. I understand that I should not regret you, given that I cannot erase you. While I refuse to exist inside the bounds of our relationship, I now accept that you indefinitely remain as a subset of me. I carry our witty jokes and your distinctive vernacular. I write poetry about you, and your traces sneak into my everyday conversations. By the way, I still have the [gray hoodie](writing/images/irl/gray-hoodie-deepmind.jpg) you gave me right before we parted ways. I can’t get myself to either wear or discard it. I’m not sure if our eventual outcome was stochastic or deterministic, but that's an imaginary distinction now. All I can hope is that you will remember me too. And maybe someday, we will meet again.

*To my first love: Our stable matching failed when our optimization objectives fractured. Still, thank you for the time when they aligned.*