I have a weird, *but hopefully healthy,* relationship with IQ. I want to know, but also not know. More specifically, I have a range in mind, but cannot and *will not* pinpoint the exact value.

This range is an interval of approximately one SD. The lower bound serves to control my imposter syndrome *(which women are statistically more likely to be affected by)*, making sure I don’t close doors prematurely. Basically, I want to make sure facts can override my feelings *(cue [Ben Shapiro](writing/images/memes/ben-shapiro-meme.gif), but in a way that supports women rather than undermines them)*. Meanwhile, the upper bound serves as a reality check to prevent my brain from spiraling. I don’t want to get stuck working on a problem that I will likely never be able to solve.

I’ll use my perceived range to reason with myself, pushing myself to complete the coding assessment that has me hyperventilating and breaking out in cold shivers. At the same time, you won’t catch me deluding myself into thinking I’ve solved Navier-Stokes with a "lean formalization" *(haha)*. My **bounded estimate** is both (i) **large enough** to allow for both humility/self-correction and striving beyond my comfort zone, and (ii) **small enough** to provide a concrete sense of self and the functional capabilities of my mind.

On the other hand, I believe knowing the exact number would only lead to fixation and unhealthy fine-grained comparisons with others. My interpretation of the value varies, depending on external circumstances *(sleep, stress, motivation)*. However, I do not consciously think about it. It’s naturally part of my sense of self *(self-confidence, self-worth)*, which fluctuates day to day. But the range itself doesn’t change.

No, I absolutely **will not reveal** that range here. I don’t believe there is any benefit of doing so—or at least, the downsides heavily outweigh the benefits, if any even exist. And that’s okay, given it is a metric for *internal calibration*, not *external validation*.​

I used to watch reruns of *The Big Bang Theory* as a teenager, when I was intrigued by the physical sciences. The show is how I learned about *Schrödinger's Cat*, a famous thought experiment that illustrates quantum superposition, where multiple states can exist at the same time. It also provided the example of Howard, who received a letter from his father who abandoned him at a young age. He refused to open the letter but never threw it out, as he always had some lingering curiosity over its contents. The gang provided a clever solution: each friend would present a reasonable version of the letter’s contents to Howard, who eventually had 6 different interpretations but did not know which was the “real” one.

Looking back, the sitcom was quite corny and unrealistic, and I often cringe now when watching older clips. However, not only did it teach my high school self some cool science concepts and provide entertainment during the grind, but it also gave me a solid understanding of *friendship*. As Howard realized, *true friends* support you through difficult times, keeping you **grounded in reality** while leaving your mind **open to imagination**.

That's precisely my Platonic ideal of self-calibration: *Schrödinger’s IQ*.