We met when I was only 18, on a windy autumn evening. Under the falling leaves, you instantly charmed me with your blunt demeanor and stoic display of intellect, and you promised me a stable life ahead. On our first date, you left witty messages on my console and told tales of unsolvable mysteries, along with the legends who devoted their lives to them.

From that day on, we spent every night together. Escaping harsh blizzards, we hid under the covers, where we solved mathematical puzzles and built systems to simulate our universe. You taught me to think methodically and decouple emotions/biases from decision-making, while I provided grounded checkpoints to your wonderfully abstract mind. Together, we envisioned the perfect life, sketched out optimal paths on dirty chalkboards, and told each other stories of past lives. I carved my name onto your back and etched our initials in centuries-old bark.

One day, we decided to pack our belongings and make the trip west, from one sea to the other. We braved through wildfires, thunderstorms, and floods; we cautiously steered on top of formidable mountains and sandy deserts. At the same time, we often stopped to marvel at nature's breathtaking creations, growing closer with each twist and turn.

We arrived in San Francisco, the city of dreams. The town stood in stark contrast to our traditional New England ways, and we felt out of place. However, we learned to assimilate, trading our wool coats and shawls for Patagonia jackets and T-shirts. We moved in together in our first studio apartment on the very top floor of a high-rise overlooking Mission Street—every night, we gazed down at the traffic, the bright lights symbolizing future prosperity. I glanced at the Golden Gate Bridge from afar and told myself that this journey was proof that our relationship would last.

Eventually, our paths diverged. I sought marriage and a family, while you insisted on pursuing AGI at all costs. We both wanted to support each other’s ideals, but the environment quickly became too hostile for me to retain my initial naivety that both could truly coexist. Nonetheless, you tried to convince me that everything would be fine, but I could detect the ever-so-slight doubt in your voice. Instead of mutual reassurance, we found ourselves in screaming matches day after day.

As such, I decided to leave. You begged me to stay, citing our history and our chemistry. Others pragmatically warned against leaving before lining up other suitors. However, I knew that waiting longer would simply delay the inevitable and prolong our current strife.

Neither logic nor resolve could make our split any less painful. Your sudden absence drove me to an insanity I had only seen in literature. Filling the void with metaphorical one-night stands, I frantically attempted to erase your memory, shamelessly branching from one partner to the next. However, between all the soil on my fingers, the raw clay in my hands, and the pillowcases stained with tears, all I could see was you. I snapped at God, furious that my starry-eyed self ever had the misfortune of stumbling upon your path, cruelly misled to a perfect fantasy that could never last. I blamed you for the demise of our relationship, denouncing the very traits that drew me to you in the first place.

Eventually, time brought enough distance. However, much to my dismay, others would constantly update me on the groundbreaking ideas you were working on. Other times, I would see your name on the news, silently marvelling at each stride you made. I gradually learned to tolerate your updates again, even though I knew I was no longer contributing to your trajectory.

I’m glad you can go on without me, though I am still learning how to do so myself. I understand that I should not regret you, knowing you were a significant part of my life and cannot be erased, even if I wanted to. I used to tell myself I was *more* than just you, but now I realize that you will always be a *part* of me, even as I unlock other compartments in my journey ahead.

I now write poetry about you, and remnants of a lost love naturally sneak into conversations with others—even those who never had the fortune of knowing you. Our inside jokes and your distinctive vernacular still live inside me, shaping how I see the world. 

That said, thank you for everything. I will never forget our shared moments or the stories you told. I’m not sure if the eventual outcome was fate, timing, or both; it’s a frivolous cause to discern the difference now. I hope you’ll remember me as well, and maybe someday, our paths will cross again.
