<!-- 12/18/25: NO MORE CHANGES -->

We met when I was 18, surrounded by falling leaves on a crisp autumn day. You instantly charmed me with your blunt attitude and stoic intellect, and you promised me a stable life ahead. On our first date, you left witty messages on my console and told tales of unsolvable mysteries and the legends who devoted their lives to them.

From that day on, we spent every night together. Under the covers, we completed sophisticated puzzles and built elegant models to imitate our universe. You taught me how to think methodically and optimize my decision-making, while I provided grounded checkpoints to your abstract, beautiful mind. Together, we envisioned the ideal life, sketched out optimal paths on dirty chalkboards, and told each other narratives of our past lives.

We decided to pack our belongings and make the trip out west, from one sea to the other. We braved wildfires, thunderstorms, and floods; we cautiously steered across formidable mountains and sandy deserts. At the same time, we often stopped to marvel at nature's creations, growing closer with every contour on the path.

We arrived in San Francisco, the city of dreams. The town stood in sharp contrast to our traditional New England ways. We learned to assimilate, trading our wool coats and shawls for Patagonia jackets and baseball caps. We moved in together in our first studio apartment on the very top floor of a high-rise overlooking Mission Street. Right after sunset, we would peer down at the never-ending traffic, the bright lights symbolizing future prosperity.

After several trips around the sun, our paths began to diverge. While you insisted on pursuing AGI at all costs, I sought marriage and a family. We both intended to support each other’s dreams, but the environment gradually became too constrained for me to latch onto my initial naivety that the two could truly coexist. Nonetheless, you tried to convince me that everything would be fine, but I could detect the subtle tones of doubt in your voice. Instead of mutual reassurance, we found ourselves in screaming matches day after day.

As such, I decided to leave. You begged me to stay, citing our history and our chemistry. Others pragmatically warned against leaving before having other suitors lined up. But at the core, I knew that waiting longer would only delay the inevitable and prolong our current strife.

Neither logic nor willpower could make our split any less painful. Your absence drove me to an insanity I had only ever witnessed in literature. Filling the void with metaphorical one-night stands, I frantically attempted to erase your memory. Aimlessly, mindlessly, yet completely shamelessly, I branched from one pursuit to the next. Still, between the soil on my fingers, the raw clay in my hands, and many pillowcases stained with tears, all I saw was you. I snapped at God, furious that my starry-eyed self had the misfortune of coming across your path, cruelly misled to a perfect fantasy that could never last. I blamed you for the demise of our relationship, denouncing the very traits that drew me in the first place. You tried to call a few times, and each time I could only retreat into the comfort of my bed with nothing but a blank stare—the same bed where we used to lie awake and hash out details of our future while the rest of the world slept.

Eventually, time brought some distance between us. However, much to my dismay, others would constantly update me on the cutting-edge developments you were working on. Other times, I would see your name on the news, bitter but silently marvelling at each stride you made. In small increments, I gradually started to tolerate your updates again, even though I knew I was no longer adding to your trajectory.

I’m glad you could go on without me, though I am still learning how to do so myself. I understand that I *should not* regret you, given that you were a meaningful segment of my existence. I *cannot* erase you, even if I wanted to. I used to tell myself I was *more than* you, but now I realize that you will always remain a *part of* me, even as I unlock other compartments in the road ahead. I write poetry about you, and traces of a lost love naturally sneak into conversations with even those who never had the fortune of knowing you. Our little jokes and your distinctive vernacular reside within me; you are the foundation of how I perceive the world.

Thank you for everything. I will never forget our shared experiences or the stories you told. I still have the gray hoodie you gave me right before we parted ways, and I can’t get myself to either wear it or throw it away. I think it'll remain at the bottom of my dresser forever. I’m not sure if our eventual outcome was due to fate, timing, or both, and it’s frivolous to discern the difference now. But maybe someday, our paths will meet again.
