I'm Jane, a former software and machine learning engineer at [Google](https://about.google/) and [DeepMind](https://deepmind.google/). After a total of 4 years at Alphabet, along with two internships during college, I decided to leave this past summer. In the following sections, I'll talk more about my background, some pros and cons of Google and DeepMind, why I left, and my next steps. Thanks to Deedy's [post](https://debarghyadas.com/writes/why-i-left-google/) for structural inspiration.

## My time at Google

Google profoundly shaped my young adult life and heavily influenced both my professional and personal identity. It has seen me through the blundering university days, the trials and tribulations of post-grad life, and eventually marriage. In fact, it was my dream company ever since I started studying computer science—a throwback to the early days of programming "Hello, World!" and basic four-function calculators.

### The timeline
- **The interview (2018):** As a sophomore who had just completed an intro data structures course, I could *somewhat* handle easy-to-medium LeetCode questions. I applied online and received an interview invitation. I took the call, and despite thinking I totally bombed it, my recruiter called me a few days later with the good news! I eagerly accepted the offer, awaiting new adventures ahead.
- **First internship, Cloud (2019):** Starting in the SF office, exploring the city, and meeting so many new friends was *exciting*. Google was everything I had dreamed of: free food, world-class real estate, and exuberant social events. Overcoming the initial learning curve, I connected with my team and learned a great deal about Google's vast infrastructure, history, and operations.
- **Second internship, Ads (2020):** One year later, COVID took the world by storm, but I thankfully still had a (remote) internship. Without the in-person presence and the extravagant intern events, things became considerably more serious and focused. That summer, I gained practical full-stack experience and learned more about the long-term expectations of full-time SWE work, all from my tiny apartment in Ithaca.
- **New grad SWE, Ads (2021):** After graduating from college, I rejoined my previous intern team as a full-time software engineer in the Bay Area, but my team remained largely remote, even after Google announced RTO. Seeking more in-person, collaborative experiences aligned with my budding interests in ML/NLP (as opposed to general SWE), I sought to transition teams after roughly a year.
- **Assistant NLP (2022):** I ultimately landed on Google Assistant, the perfect crossover between software engineering, machine learning, and the language sciences. I felt a little out of place, as the team consisted mostly of highly experienced/specialized folks, but I gradually integrated into projects and eventually landed my first promotion. Suddenly, ChatGPT entered the playing field, and LLMs started gaining traction all at once. Our team quickly faced uncertainty as newer technologies and competitors emerged.
- **Bard/Gemini (2023):** After a couple of months spent twiddling our thumbs, my team was thankfully reorganized into Bard *(now known as Gemini), which was later integrated with Google DeepMind (aka GDM)*. Our new environment felt more like a startup than the large-corporation vibes of main-Google. We ambitiously set out to launch our own LLM-powered virtual assistant, embracing daily standups, rapid growth opportunities, and limited corporate oversight. My team expanded quickly, and we enjoyed countless events, celebrations, and gifts in recognition of all our hard work!

## General commentary

For so long, ambitious students and industry professionals have striven for *The Google Job™*, considered the ultimate career goal. Every time I open the app, LinkedIn greets me with a flood of Noogler posts that accumulate thousands of likes within minutes. Many attributes make the company hard to refuse. However, beneath all the pomp and circumstance, the massive tech giant is plagued by instability, inefficiencies, and unsustainability.

### The good
- **The people:** I've worked with some of the most talented, hardworking, and passionate individuals in the field, thanks to my time at Google and GDM. Seeing so many bright minds from around the world join together on a shared mission to advance technology has been enormously inspiring and rewarding. Saying goodbye to my wonderful mentors, colleagues, and friends was undoubtedly one of the most challenging things I had ever done.
- **The impact:** Google serves billions of users daily across all its products and services. As an engineer, a single line of code written *(or unwritten)* inside any part of the massive codebase can instantly affect millions around the globe. Though you may view yourself as insignificant when surrounded by a bunch of peers working on similar *(and often mundane)* tasks, the level of impact you create through working at Google is really something special.
- **The perks:** The famous microkitchens, commuter shuttles, diverse cafés, and many other perks have given Google the "best company to work for" title many times across a wide range of sources. There's no doubt that Google goes the extra mile to treat its employees well. Google is also largely credited with setting these high standards of well-being across the broader tech industry, defining the industry's prominent laid-back culture.


### The bad
- **Stagnation:** A quarter-century after the garage days, Google has grown into a corporate giant of nearly 200k employees. Innovation and passion have faded, and many teams now exist in maintenance mode with little room for growth. This stagnation was easier to accept during the tech boom, when two-hour workdays were typical—*rest and vest*, as they say. Now, those same teams face layoff after layoff, with the constant threat of being replaced or rendered obsolete. Advancement beyond L4/L5 has become exceedingly rare, and if one expects to peak in their career 2 years after graduating from college, what's the point of even trying? Note that this applies more to main-Google; ironically, my time at GDM was *far* from idle.
- **The bubble:** Google feels isolated from the industry because its tech stack is incredibly siloed. Engineers quite painstakingly onboard and grow accustomed to Google's internal processes and tools, but these skills have limited value in the broader tech market. Even at GDM, we maintained highly company-specific ways of doing things, leaving me out of sync with the broader AI community. My work often felt like overfitting to Google's internal protocol for optimizing various metrics inside Assistant/Bard/Gemini. Keeping up with the field required a lot of homework outside my actual job, which was tough to carve time for during my time on Gemini.
- **The bureaucracy:** At one point, I had eight managers in my reporting chain. With so many levels, communication and coordination become difficult. All the conflicting priorities lead to thousands of precious eng-hours thrown down the drain, as projects are constantly moved around, deprioritized, or cut entirely. ICs commonly misalign with leadership, and decisions stall for months because they require approval from so many different stakeholders. In addition, many teams end up working on something similar due to miscommunication, and politics take over when determining who actually gets to take the prize. As a result, efficiency suffers drastically—quite the opposite of the startup spirit.
- **Compensation:** I've never been the one to fixate on TC; I've simply opted to live comfortably while working on something I found interesting. Still, many complain that Google's offers severely lag behind competitors in both the general SWE and AI markets. The discrepancy was fine a few years ago; Google clearly got away with it because of its legacy and name brand. But now, in the rapidly evolving AI landscape with all the exorbitant packages to poach talent, I don't think Google can afford to be slacking anymore. Retention has become a greater issue lately, with top performers leaving at an accelerating rate. If Google wants to both retain and attract new talent to remain competitive, it really needs to do better here.
- **The AI race:** At GDM (and many other AI orgs within Google), preaching work-life balance is like putting a band-aid on a broken leg. I talked about stagnation within the main org, and, *ironically*, this is the exact opposite. We faced constant competitor launches and unending deadlines. Imagine each time you are about to complete a project, and you think it’s *finally* time to relax for once. But then there’s a sudden fire, or something outside your control delays the launch, or another project becomes P000+ and the team needs to shift focus completely. No one demanded 996; it’s just what we had to do to survive. I have nothing against sprints, but this one never ended. And how long can one truly sustain a sprint for?

## Why I left

One thing I’ve noticed is that life doesn’t stop for anyone, even those caught inside a perpetual AI sprint. After facing major changes, realizations, and shifting priorities, I felt like I couldn’t give my best anymore. Though my team at GDM has always been supportive, coasting didn't feel morally right, and I had no energy to switch teams or companies. I wanted to take some time off entirely from the AI/tech world and live on my own terms for a bit.

### Life changes
- **Marriage:** My husband and I got married in the summer of 2024. Previously, I didn't think marriage would change much about our lives, as we had been together since our first year of college. In fact, I had spent my entire time on Bard/Gemini being engaged and trying to plan our wedding, taking pride in my busyness, productivity, and self-perceived ability to *have it all*. If I could accomplish all this during the pre-wedding festivities, imagine how productive I'll be afterwards? But then the day passed, and our lives/my mindset somewhat shifted. I've come to the realization that the optimization function for a legally joined couple is vastly different from that for a single individual; I'll go into this later.
- **Health:** Around that time, I also had a thought: *maybe I should get a health checkup, since I'm in my mid-twenties now*. So I went to the doctor and did a lab panel, and \*everything\* was red. Okay, a bit of an exaggeration, but I was shocked. My tests showed I had high cholesterol levels, glucose levels corresponding to prediabetes, and a severe vitamin D deficiency. My former self thought that since I was relatively thin and had no glaring issues, I didn't need to take anything too seriously. I had become complacent with a sedentary lifestyle *(only getting activity on the weekends)* and a poor diet *(I consumed tons of sugar, eating pastries for breakfast, and relying on unhealthy snacks at work for quick energy during intense workloads)*. I had always taken my health for granted, and this was a huge reality check.

### Mental bandwidth
With so many things going on at once and my team relentlessly growing in size and complexity, it became so strenuous to keep up. I naturally put my job first, and it consumed me mentally. I woke up, thought about all my work obligations, responded to pings, and rushed between meetings, just to repeat everything the next day. On my days off, I’d push the cart at the grocery store with all the upcoming deadlines in the back of my mind. In bed, different variations of our model prompt would suddenly appear in my imagination just as I was about to nod off.

While I had been busy at various points in my life, such as high school or college, this time was different, and I attribute it to 3 reasons. First, being in school meant exposure to a broader range of subjects, such as the humanities and arts, rather than purely technical ones. Having this balance meant my brain wasn't confined to a single realm and could rest in between. Second, I had limited responsibilities other than academic achievement. During high school, my parents cooked all the meals and kept the house clean, and in college, our dorms and dining halls provided everything we needed to keep our undivided focus on education. As an adult, I became responsible for the basic upkeep of my life that I had previously taken for granted. Lastly, as mentioned before, I have to actively work on my health now. Plus, the mere fact that I am older now makes it harder to do the deep technical work that I handled so effortlessly in my teens. I had to be operating under optimal circumstances *(8 hours of sleep, peak energy levels, etc.)* to perform anything technically complex.

I also noticed my literary capabilities declining. The only time I ever read or wrote anything was coding or prompting. My vocabulary was diminishing as I struggled to recall words I had used before. My spoken language felt choppy and unsophisticated. I noticed this and tried to get back into reading, but it had become so arduous for my brain to process actual literary text that wasn't code or a prompt. It felt like I had actually become a robot/computer, rather than just training them —living and breathing in binary.

### Macroeconomics in practice
Recall macroeconomics 101, where you learned the concepts of absolute advantage and comparative advantage. Simply put, absolute advantage measures a nation's efficiency in producing a good relative to another good, and comparative advantage measures the nation's production of the two goods relative to the production ratios of another nation. To determine whether trade and specialization are mutually advantageous between the two, we look at the comparative rather than the absolute advantage.

If simple mathematics can verify the strategy for international policy, could a parallel be drawn inside marriages? Since childhood, I have focused on optimizing myself as a single unit. I was academically gifted, especially in math and science. Thus, I naturally gravitated towards a technical career and focused most of my attention on my academic and professional accomplishments. However, after marriage, I no longer viewed my life as an optimization objective for a single individual, but rather a holistic unit of two. My husband, who is an AI researcher, also had a demanding job and was arguably more technically proficient and capable of handling intense workloads. At the same time, though I prided myself on being career-driven, I was clearly better *(and naturally took on most of the load)* at preparing meals, keeping our space organized, and managing general household responsibilities.

As a result, I thought we could temporarily experiment with *specialization* to maximize efficiency in our lives. This simplified model seemed to have the potential to enable me to be more productive in a compromised state, given these economic principles, while minimizing the overhead cost of task/context switching. Consequently, my husband took on all financial responsibility while I handled everything at home. So far, I'd say this experiment has gone quite well and has produced measurable improvements for the both of us. In terms of quantifiables, we have consumed more nutritious, homemade meals, have more time to exercise and spend time together, and our stress levels have gone down significantly. Additionally, by not having to worry about anything at home and therefore being able to redirect that extra focus to work, my husband has been able to accelerate his career, which has entirely made up for — *and even surpassed* — the initial loss of my income.

So is this it? Is this how couples should operate: man hard at work, woman confined to the home? Not necessarily, so don't come at me for putting out *anti-feminist propaganda*. Obviously, every couple is different, each individual has varying goals/interests, and there's more to life than optimizing efficiency. This setup is just what has worked for us in the moment. I will say, though, it's been quite convenient for my husband to advance his career faster and for me to focus on my health, which is especially critical if I want kids in the future—*a harsh reality of being a woman*.

### Life outside tech
Another motivation I had was to expand my horizons beyond tech/AI after being siloed in the industry for so long. Especially with a husband working at the forefront of AI, I sought to diversify myself and our shared life. Even if I eventually returned, I knew it was essential to step back to achieve a more balanced perspective. I decided to use this time to enjoy all the things I wanted to do but had never had the time/energy for before, as described in the next section.

## What's next?

Currently, I've been focusing on health, household responsibilities, and simply trying to live a well-rounded life without too much structure. In a society so tied to the concept of occupation, I don't have clear answers about my next career move at the moment. Because of this, I hesitated to include this section, but I'll cover more of what I've done so far and my vision for the future.

### What I've done
- **Prioritizing my health:** Health is my utmost priority, and it falls into three categories: exercise, diet, and sleep. I've been maintaining a somewhat consistent weekly [schedule](/fitness.html) of runs/hikes/gym time, have done my fair share of research and experimentation on nutrition optimization *(in addition to the manual labor of meal prep—see [cookbook](/cookbook.html))*, and am broadly trying to get enough rest. I'm planning to make a separate post about all of this as well, so stay tuned.
- **Exploring other interests:** When I first left my job, all I wanted to do was work with my hands rather than use my brain intensively. I wanted to try something new and different, and get my mind off of AI/tech entirely. I began taking a few ceramics classes at a local studio and started volunteering at our local nonprofit community garden and cat shelter. I've also started collecting and growing my own [plants](/plants.html), and adopted two [kittens](/kitties.html) after fostering an entire litter. It's been eye-opening to explore different domains, and I find life much more enriching now.
- **Embracing stochasticity:** I also set out to simply live, at least for a period of time, without artificial deadlines or rigid structure. Instead of enforcing a strict schedule/timeline, I try to listen to myself and just do what feels right, day by day. I've always been an extremely Type A person, and this was very unsettling at first, but after some time, I've begun to really appreciate this way of living! I’m not claiming I won't default back to a more organized or demanding lifestyle in the future; I'm just trying to enjoy the present.

### My future goals
- **Achieving green metrics:** Referencing the Google standard, if I make my health a top OKR, there must be deliverables. While fitness goals are subjective, I want to achieve an all-green health panel, meaning no abnormal results in any category *(thankfully, prediabetes and high cholesterol are fully reversible)*, before starting anything new in my life. As told on Gemini, *the dashboard needs to be all green before we launch*!
- **Solidifying habits:** In addition to simply obtaining a healthy panel, I'd like for my current routine to fully materialize before settling into the next chapter of my life. I'm proud of the progress I've made so far, and the last thing I would want is for everything to go down the drain as soon as I move onto the *next big thing*. Besides, I'm still experimenting with different methods and mechanisms, so it might take more time to find and establish an optimal routine that truly works the best.
- **Finding something sustainable:** After all is said and done, two (conventional) roads diverge: *[1] go back to tech/AI*, or *[2] remain in the domestic sphere and start having/raising kids*. Of course, there are also career pivots, lateral moves, side hustles, etc., that I can explore. Right now, I'm not sure where I'll land next. I want to remain in the professional world in some capacity, as it would add another dimension to my life. I don't view having kids as an excuse to get out of it; if anything, it's a reason to *stay* professionally involved, so I’m not siloed or deeply confined to a single objective as I was at my previous job—the prime recipe for burnout. At the same time, I need to find something sustainable, health- and time-wise. I currently want a break from anything technically complex, but I still want to make use of the degree I worked so hard for. Anyway, I'm not putting too much pressure on myself right now to figure this all out. I've generally found that rushed plans are far from ideal.

In conclusion, the future is uncertain, but that’s what makes it exciting, especially when I thought I had my life perfectly mapped out before. I'm looking forward to whatever comes next, and am grateful for everything I got to experience throughout my time at Google, GDM, and the broader tech/AI industry. As the saying goes, *when nothing is sure, everything is possible*.

## *Parting words*

*Thank you, Google and DeepMind, for a memorable experience. Thank you to my colleagues, mentors, and friends for all the memories, laughs, and support. Here is a [photo](writing/images/jane-google-2018.jpg) of me in late 2018, on my first visit to the Google HQ. Lastly, thank you for reading. If you have any questions or comments, please don't hesitate to [contact](/contact) me.*
