I'm Jane, a former software and machine learning engineer at [Google](https://about.google/) and [DeepMind](https://deepmind.google/), where I worked on [Gemini](https://gemini.google.com/) and [Google Assistant](https://assistant.google.com/). After four years there, plus two internships during my time at [Cornell](https://www.cornell.edu), I left Alphabet this past summer. Here, I share *why*. In the following sections, I cover my background, general pros and cons of Google/DeepMind, my reasons for leaving, and my next steps. Thanks to Deedy's [post](https://debarghyadas.com/writes/why-i-left-google/) for structural inspiration.


## My time at Google

Google profoundly shaped my young adult life, influencing both my professional and personal identity. It has seen me through the blundering university days, the trials and tribulations of post-grad life, and eventually marriage. Additionally, it was my dream company ever since I started studying computer science—a throwback to the early days of programming "Hello, World!" and basic four-function calculators.

### Background and timeline
<!-- TODO: condense and make it flow better -->
- **The interview (2018):** During a busy sophomore semester, a recruiter reached out to invite me to interview for an internship at Google. While I didn't feel adequately prepared (the academic year didn't leave much room for Leetcode practice), I knew I couldn't pass on this opportunity. I hesitantly took the interview, where I solved one question and submitted a rough solution to the next. I didn't expect much afterward, but to my surprise, my recruiter called a week later with the good news! I eagerly accepted the offer, and team matching quickly followed as I began preparing for my internship.
- **First internship, Cloud (2019):** Starting at Google while living in SF for the first time was exciting. My co-interns and I explored the offices and the city, attended lively social events, and relished in all the free food and swag. However, when I first started my project, I struggled with the initial learning curve; I couldn't even get anything to compile at first (Google's internal code editor can be a bit tricky for first-timers). Thankfully, my host and team were extremely patient, and I ultimately finished my project ahead of schedule while learning a great deal about Google's vast infrastructure and history.
- **Second internship, Ads (2020):** One year later, COVID had taken the world by storm, so Google made our internships remote. I had my laptop and monitor shipped to Ithaca and set up a WFH office in my student apartment. Without the in-person hype and the extravagant intern events, things were considerably more serious and focused. I gained practical full-stack experience and learned more about the long-term expectations of full-time SWE work, as opposed to the summer before, when I had worked on a relatively self-contained intern project. After completing my project and delivering my final presentation, I was all set to join Google full-time.
- **New grad SWE, Ads (2021):** I rejoined my previous intern team, this time as a full-time SWE in the Bay Area. My familiarity with the tech stack gave me a head start, allowing me to make immediate contributions. However, my team was largely remote both during and after the pandemic. While I liked my team, I longed for something more in-person, collaborative, and closer to my interests in machine learning/natural language processing (compared to general SWE). As a result, I began my transition to my next team, Google Assistant, after approximately one year on Ads.
- **Assistant NLP (2022):** My new team had a heavy office presence, and I met so many new faces. Everyone seemed so brilliant and passionate about what they were doing. The team leaned more towards experienced and specialized folks, so I felt out of place as an early-career SWE. Nevertheless, I gradually integrated into projects and eventually landed my first promotion. Around the same time, ChatGPT had just launched, and LLMs were rapidly gaining traction. Suddenly, Google Assistant wasn't so hot anymore, and our team faced uncertainty as newer technologies emerged.
- **Bard/Gemini (2023):**  That Thanksgiving, leadership reorganized my team into Bard (now Gemini), which later became part of Google DeepMind (GDM). Everyone was new, and the environment was fast-paced as we ambitiously set to launch our own LLM-powered virtual assistant. It was the ultimate race to catch up, so we dove in headfirst, embracing daily standups, rapid growth opportunities, and limited corporate oversight. The team expanded quickly, and we enjoyed countless events, celebrations, and gifts in recognition of all our hard work. I was honored to work on this critical launch with such a dedicated team.

## General commentary

For so long, ambitious students and industry professionals have striven for *The Google Job&trade;*, considered the ultimate career goal. Each time I open the app, LinkedIn greets me with a flood of "I got into Google" posts that accumulate thousands of likes. Many attributes make the company hard to refuse. However, beneath all the pomp and circumstance, instabilities, inefficiencies, and unsustainabilities plague the massive tech giant.

### The good
- **The people:** I've worked with some of the most talented, hardworking, and passionate individuals in the field, thanks to my time at Google and GDM. Seeing so many bright minds from around the world join together on a shared mission to advance technology has been enormously inspiring and rewarding. Saying goodbye to my wonderful mentors, colleagues, and friends was undoubtedly one of the most challenging things I had ever done.
- **The impact:** Google serves billions of users daily across all its products and services. As an engineer, a single line of code written (*or unwritten*) inside any part of the massive codebase can instantly affect millions around the globe. Though you may view yourself as insignificant when surrounded by a bunch of peers working on similar (*and often mundane*) tasks, the level of impact you create inside Alphabet is really something special.
- **The perks:** The famous microkitchens, commuter shuttles, diverse cafés, and many other perks have given Google the "best company to work for" title many times across a wide range of sources. There's no doubt that Google goes the extra mile to treat its employees well. Google is also largely credited with setting these high standards of well-being across the broader tech industry, defining the industry's prominent laid-back culture.


### The bad
- **Stagnation:** A quarter-century after the garage days, Google has grown into a corporate giant of nearly 200k employees. Innovation and passion have faded, and many teams now run in maintenance mode with little room for growth. This was easier to accept during the tech boom, when two-hour workdays were typical—*rest and vest*, as they say. Now, those same teams face layoff after layoff, with the constant threat of being replaced or rendered obsolete. Advancement beyond L4/L5 has become exceedingly rare, and if one expects to peak in their career 2 years after graduating from college, what's the point of even trying? Note that this applies more to main-Google; ironically, my time at GDM was *far* from idle.
- **The bubble:** Google feels isolated from the industry because its tech stack is incredibly siloed. Engineers spend valuable time onboarding to Google's internal processes and tools that aren't generally portable in the broader tech market. Even at GDM, we had our own specialized way of doing things, leaving me out of sync with the larger AI community. Instead of truly understanding AI, my work often felt like overfitting to Google's internal protocol for optimizing internal metrics in Assistant/Bard/Gemini. Keeping up with the field required a lot of homework outside my actual job, which was tough to accommodate during my time on Gemini.
- **The bureaucracy:** At one point, I had eight managers in my reporting chain. With so many levels, communication and coordination become difficult. Conflicting priorities mean projects are constantly moved around, deprioritized, or cut entirely, throwing thousands of precious eng-hours down the drain. ICs commonly misalign with leadership, and decisions stall for months because they require approval from so many different stakeholders. In addition, many teams duplicate efforts due to miscommunication, and politics take over when determining who takes the prize. As a result, efficiency suffers drastically—quite the opposite of the startup spirit.
- **Compensation:** I've never been the one to fixate on TC. Instead, I've simply opted to live comfortably while working on something I found interesting. Still, many complain that Google's offers severely lag behind competitors in both the general SWE and AI markets. The discrepancy was fine a few years ago; Google clearly got away with it because of its legacy and brand. But now, in the rapidly evolving AI landscape with all the exorbitant packages to poach talent, I don't think Google can afford to be slacking anymore. Retention has become a greater issue lately, with top performers leaving at an increasing rate. If Google wants to both retain and attract new talent to remain competitive, it really needs to do better here.
- **The AI race:** It's no secret that the AI industry resembles a high-pressure cooker these days, and Gemini (and other AI orgs within Google) is no exception. This culture provides a stark contrast against the dormancy impacting the broader organization. At GDM, while leadership constantly preached work-life balance, endless competitor launches and looming deadlines meant we could never truly relax. Each completed target ultimately led to another fire, unexpected delay, or priority shift. No one demanded *996*, but the pressure made it feel inevitable. We had to be on all the time, including our commute home, family dinners, weekend outings, and so on. I have nothing against sprints, but this one never ended. And how long can one truly sustain a sprint for?

## Why I left

In midst of the perpetual AI sprint, I experienced significant life changes, realizations, and shifting priorities. My team at GDM has always been supportive, but I felt like I couldn't give them my best anymore. Coasting didn't feel morally right in this high-pressure environment, and I couldn't muster the energy to switch teams or companies. I wanted to take some time off entirely from the AI/tech world and live on my own terms for a bit.

### Life changes
- **Marriage:** My husband and I got married in the summer of 2024. Previously, I didn't think marriage would change much about our lives, as we had been together since our first year of college. In fact, I had spent my entire time on Bard/Gemini being engaged and trying to plan our wedding, taking pride in my busyness, productivity, and self-perceived ability to *have it all*. If I could accomplish all this during the pre-wedding festivities, imagine how productive I'll be after? But then the day passed, and our lives/my mindset somewhat shifted. I've come to realize that the optimization function for a legally joined couple is vastly different from that for a single individual; I'll go into this later.
- **Health:** Around that time, I also had a thought: *maybe I should get a health checkup, since I'm in my mid-twenties now*. So I went to the doctor and did a lab panel, and \*everything\* was red. Okay, a bit of an exaggeration, but I was shocked. My tests showed I had high cholesterol levels, glucose levels corresponding to prediabetes, and a severe vitamin D deficiency. My naive self previously thought that since I was relatively thin and had no glaring issues, I didn't need to take anything too seriously. I had become complacent with a sedentary lifestyle (*only getting activity on the weekends*) and a poor diet (*I consumed tons of sugar, eating pastries for breakfast, and relying on many snacks at work to provide energy during intense workloads*). I had always taken my health for granted before, and this was a huge reality check.

### Mental bandwidth
With so many things going on at once and my team relentlessly growing in size and complexity, it became so strenuous to keep up. I naturally put my job first, and it consumed me mentally. I woke up, thought about all my work obligations, responded to pings, and rushed between meetings, just to repeat everything the next day. I'd push the grocery cart at the supermarket on autopilot, carrying all the upcoming deadlines in the back of my head. I'd lie in bed, and different variations of our model prompt would appear in my head just as I was about to nod off, jerking me awake. It was like *the grind* took over my brain, and I didn't know how to shut it off.

While I had been busy at various points in my life, such as high school or college, this time was different, and I attribute it to 3 reasons. First, being in school meant exposure to a broader range of subjects, such as the humanities and arts, rather than purely technical ones. Having this balance meant my brain wasn't confined to a single realm and could rest in between. Second, I had limited responsibilities other than academic achievement. During high school, my parents cooked all the meals and kept the house clean, and in college, our dorms and dining halls provided everything we needed to keep our undivided focus on education. As an adult, I became responsible for the basic upkeep of my life that I had previously taken for granted. Lastly, as mentioned before, I have to actively work on my health now. Plus, the mere fact that I am older now makes it harder to do the deep technical work that I handled so effortlessly in my teens. I had to be operating under optimal circumstances (*8 hours of sleep, peak energy levels, etc.*) to perform anything technically complex.

I also noticed my literary capabilities declining. The only time I ever read or wrote anything was coding or prompting. My vocabulary was diminishing as I struggled to recall words I had used before. My spoken language appeared choppy and unsophisticated. I noticed this and tried to get back into reading, but it had become so arduous for my brain to process actual literary text that wasn't code or a prompt. It felt like I had become a robot/computer, rather than just training them —living and breathing in binary.

### Macroeconomics in practice
The concept of absolute advantage vs. comparative advantage is foundational to basics macroeconomic theory. Simply put, absolute advantage measures a nation's efficiency in producing a good relative to another good, and comparative advantage measures the nation's production of the two goods relative to the production ratios of another nation. To determine whether trade and specialization are mutually advantageous between the two, we look at comparative rather than absolute advantage.

If simple mathematics can verify the strategy for international policy, could a parallel be drawn inside marriages? Since childhood, I have focused on optimizing myself as a single unit. I was academically gifted, especially in math and science. Thus, I naturally gravitated towards a technical career and focused most of my attention on my academic and professional accomplishments. However, after marriage, I no longer viewed my life as an optimization objective for a single individual, but rather a holistic unit of two. My husband, who is an AI researcher, also had a demanding job and was arguably more technically proficient and capable of handling intense workloads. At the same time, though I prided myself on being career-driven, I was clearly better (*and naturally took on most of the load*) at preparing meals, keeping our space organized, and managing general household responsibilities.

As a result, I thought we could experiment with *specialization* to maximize efficiency in our lives. This simplified model seemed to have the potential to enable me to be more productive in a compromised state, given these economic principles, while minimizing the overhead cost of task/context switching. Consequently, my husband took on the financial responsibility, and I handled everything else: cooking healthy meals, maintaining our home, managing our shared schedule, etc. So far, I'd say this experiment has gone quite well and has produced measurable improvements for the both of us. In terms of quantifiables, we have consumed more nutritious, homemade meals, have more time to exercise and spend time together, and our stress levels have gone down significantly. Additionally, by not having to worry about anything at home and therefore being able to redirect that extra focus to work, my husband has been able to accelerate his career, which has entirely made up for — *and even surpassed* — the initial loss of my income.

So is this it? Is this how couples should operate: man hard at work, woman confined to the home? Not necessarily, so don't come at me for putting out *anti-feminist propaganda*. Obviously, every couple is different, each individual has varying goals/interests, and there's more to life than optimizing efficiency. This setup is just what has worked for us in the moment. I will say, though, it's been quite convenient for my husband to advance his career faster and for me to focus on my health, which is especially critical if I want kids in the future—*a harsh reality of being a woman*.

### Life outside tech
Another motivation was to expand my horizons beyond tech/AI after being siloed in the industry for so long. Especially with a husband working at the forefront of AI, I sought to diversify myself and our shared life. Even if I eventually went back, I knew it was essential to step back to achieve a more balanced perspective. I decided to use this time to enjoy all the things I wanted to do but had never had the time or energy for before, as described in the next section.

## What's next?

Currently, I've been focusing on health, household responsibilities, and simply trying to live a well-rounded life without too much structure. In a society so tied to the concept of occupation, I don't have clear answers about my next career move at the moment. Because of this, I hesitated on including this section, but I'll cover more on what I've done so far and my vision for the future.

### What I've done
- **Prioritizing my health:** Health is my utmost priority, and it falls into three categories: exercise, diet, and sleep. I've been maintaining a somewhat consistent weekly [schedule](/fitness.html) of runs/hikes/gym time, have done my fair share of research and experimentation on nutrition optimization (*in addition to the manual labor of meal prep—see [cookbook](/cookbook.html)*), and am broadly trying to get enough rest. I'm planning to make a separate post about all of this as well, so stay tuned.
- **Exploring other interests:** When I first left my job, all I wanted to do was work with my hands rather than use my brain intensively. I wanted to try something new and different, and get my mind off of AI/tech entirely. I began taking a few ceramics classes at a local studio and started volunteering at our local nonprofit community garden and cat shelter. I've also started collecting and growing my own [plants](/plants.html), and adopted two [kittens](/kitties.html) after fostering an entire litter. It's been eye-opening to explore different domains, and I find life much more enriching now.
- **Embracing stochasticity:** I also set out to simply live, at least for a period of time, without artificial deadlines or rigid structure. Instead of enforcing a strict schedule/timeline, I try to listen to myself and just do what feels right, day by day. I've always been an extremely Type A person, and this was very unsettling at first, but after some time, I've begun to really appreciate this way of living! I’m not claiming I won't default back to a more organized or demanding lifestyle in the future; I'm just trying to enjoy the present.

### My future goals
- **Achieving green metrics:** Referencing the Google standard, if I make my health a top OKR, there must be deliverables. While fitness goals are subjective, I want to achieve an all-green health panel, meaning no abnormal results in any category (*thankfully, prediabetes and high cholesterol are fully reversible*), before starting anything new in my life. As told on Gemini, the dashboard needs to be all green before we launch!
- **Solidifying habits:** In addition to simply obtaining a healthy panel, I'd like for my current routine to fully materialize before settling into the next chapter of my life. I'm proud of the progress I've made so far, and the last thing I would want is for everything to go down the drain as soon as I move onto the *next big thing*. Besides, I'm still experimenting with different methods and mechanisms, so it might take more time to find and establish an optimal routine that truly works the best.
- **Finding something sustainable:** After all is said and done, two (conventional) roads diverge: [1] *go back to tech/AI*, or [2] *remain in the domestic sphere and start having/raising kids*. Of course, there are also career pivots, lateral moves, side hustles, etc., that I can explore. Right now, I'm not sure where I'll land next. I want to remain in the professional world in some capacity, as it would add another dimension to my life. I don't view having kids as an excuse to get out of it; if anything, it's a reason to *stay* professionally involved so I’m not siloed or deeply confined to a single objective, as I was at my previous job—the prime recipe for burnout. At the same time, I need to find something sustainable, health- and time-wise. I currently want a break from anything technically complex, but I still want to make use of the degree I worked so hard for. Anyway, I'm not putting too much pressure on myself right now to figure this all out. I've generally found that rushed plans are far from ideal.

In conclusion, the future is uncertain, but that’s what makes it exciting, especially when I thought I had my life perfectly mapped out before. I'm looking forward to whatever comes next, and am grateful for everything I got to experience throughout my time at Google, GDM, and the broader tech/AI industry. As the saying goes, *when nothing is sure, everything is possible*.

## *Parting words*

*Thank you, Google and DeepMind, for a memorable experience. Thank you to my colleagues, mentors, and friends for all the memories, laughs, and support. Here is a [photo](writing/images/jane-google.jpg) of me in late 2018, on my first visit to the Google HQ. Lastly, thank you for reading. If you have any questions or comments, please don't hesitate to [contact](/contact) me.*
